---
layout: post
title: 'Revisiting *Person of Interest*'
subtitle: 'With thoughts on *Westworld*, *Lost*, and the state of the world'
date:   2020-04-13 12:00:00 -0400
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

It's worth noting upfront that this post is **spoiler-free**. I've had
spirited debates with friends and colleagues about whether intentional
spoiling should be considered verbal assault; I won't retread those
here, but suffice it to say I like to avoid spoiling things for people,
intentionally or otherwise.

---

Recently I've been re-watching *Person of Interest*.

In case you haven't heard of it, it's a crime/sci-fi/action procedural
that aired on CBS from 2011 to 2016 about a secret government computer
system that spies on citizens to predict and prevent violent crimes.
When it started airing, my main activities were studying computer
science and watching as many TV shows as possible -- favorites from
around that time included genre-neighbors like *24*, *Breaking Bad,
Chuck, Psych*, *The Wire*... the list goes on -- so *Person of Interest*
was right up my alley.

<!--more-->

I enjoyed the show so much that I used it as my example in an
application essay for a class at Wesleyan called "Television
Storytelling" -- the prompt was to briefly discuss a show that
demonstrated narrative complexity. As someone who definitely would have
considered himself a "TV connoisseur" at the time, I was determined to
get into the class, despite not being a film or American studies major
(an "outsider," the professor called me, in our application email
exchange). I'd been rejected with *The Wire* the previous year, but
*Person of Interest* was a lucky second swing: the professor was a fan
of the show. I joined and enjoyed the class, and for the final paper I
stuck to my winning strategy and wrote about *POI* again, expanding my
application essay into an (upon re-read, somewhat overly-expositional
and unfortunately spoiler-heavy) analysis of the show's journey from
classic procedural to high-concept serialized drama.

Now, six years since writing that paper and four since the show
concluded, I'm once again three seasons into watching *Person of
Interest*, this time with hindsight (or foresight, depending on your
perspective), so of course I'm once again writing about it, too.

*POI* was created by Jonathan Nolan, younger brother of Christopher and
someone whose career I've followed with great interest. Nolan's current
project is *Westworld* on HBO -- another favorite of mine -- which
explores many of the same themes and sci-fi concepts, but for which
Nolan (and co-creator Lisa Joy) presumably have far more creative
control than Nolan had producing primetime TV for a major network. And I
think of it of it as a spiritual sequel to *POI*; a second album where
the band doesn't have to worry quite so much about getting on the radio.
Frankly, its existence is a dream come true for me as a fan.

But a fan listens to their favorite album countless times, until they
can practically play it in their mind. Until every word, note, and swell
is familiar and comforting. Until the music becomes the backdrop to that
entire era of their life, and they can't listen to it without leaping
back to those times. TV shows -- particularly network TV shows of that
era -- were experienced once, usually, over the span of *years*. They
hit you hard and fast and left you reeling for days (sometimes weeks,
months!) between episodes. They had exactly 42 minutes to tell their
story, and only so much room for subtlety. Leave too much to the
imagination, and the audience will imagine something better than you can
ever deliver\*.

*\**Lost *comes to mind, which I binged-watched after-the-fact and truly
loved, but which massively divided fans who watched it as it aired, and
inspired such a torrent of cyber-hate that creator Damon Lindelof was
forced to quit Twitter. He then proceeded to dunk on all of his haters
by creating the two greatest follow-up albums the world's ever seen:*
The Leftovers *(an exercise in the agony of searching for meaning -- and
not coincidentally my favorite show of all time) and* Watchmen *(an
insane gambit to follow-up a beloved comic series that somehow managed
to delight even the most diehard fans of the original).*

Today we live in a television paradise. The advent of streaming and the
popularization of premium cable has ushered in a completely new era,
where companies compete over visionaries with even moderate potential
and give them complete creative freedom over their masterpieces. The
virtual shelves are stocked with complex, serialized shows that drip
with subtlety of storytelling and demand binge-watching (and often
re-watching, after some time has passed, to squeeze out every last drop
of impact), and there are far more available than I could possibly
consume in my lifetime.

Nevertheless I was thrilled to see *Person of Interest* on Netflix, and
I leapt at the chance to revisit it. And I went in expecting *Westworld
1.0* -- and that's how I've sold it to friends who haven't seen it, too
-- but I've been reminded that it's something entirely different. The
themes are there, and the storytelling is as intricate as ever, but it's
undeniably a relic. *Person of Interest* is the best possible version of
what it is: a weekly procedural that tells a compelling, high-concept
dystopian sci-fi story, while tricking you into thinking you're watching
a network TV show. And I think we've moved past that.

The world has changed a lot since 2014, in many more ways than just the
quality of our TV shows. *Person of Interest* was ahead of its time but
is also a product of it, both in execution and in subject matter. It's
almost hard to relate to *POI's* imagined dystopia -- one where the
government's greatest evils are precipitated by its steadfast mission to
protect the people, at all costs -- when in reality we got the raw end
of both deals: we're spied on mainly for profit, and the people in power
routinely prioritize their own interests and fail to adequately protect
us at nearly every opportunity.

And so my experience re-watching the show has been bittersweet. It's a
sobering reminder of a time when the world felt under control (maybe not
by a massive supercomputer, but at least by intelligent people who cared
deeply), and the realities of its initial format highlight the
sometimes-awkward contrivances that were necessary to support it. I will
always regard the show highly, and I'm looking forward to finishing my
re-watch, but it's not quite the same -- nothing is.

So, **should you watch *Person of Interest*?**

Maybe!

If you ever enjoyed weekly procedurals (think *House*, *Criminal Minds*)
or shows that pushed the limits of their format (think *Batman: The
Animated Series*, *The* *X-Files*), you may well love *Person of
Interest*, because it's the pinnacle of the art form. If your enjoyment
in TV is rooted in today's modern serialized stories, ripe for
binge-watching, it may not be for you. If you do decide to watch it, I'd
suggest taking your time. Throw on an episode here and there when you
feel like it; don't try to power through it like you would *Game of
Thrones*. It was designed, meticulously, as a weekly window into a world
that grows and changes along with you; if you go too fast, the long-term
conflicts resolve too quickly and lose their impact.

If any of that sounds good, I wholeheartedly recommend it. But do
yourself a favor and live in it for a while.
